Can being a little annoyed when trying to access local data end up being
something good? Hi, I'm Sharon Machlis, longtime tech journalist, now retired
mostly, here to hopefully inspire at least some of you on how your data
skills can help your local community. And some good news for the introverts among
us. Okay. Why is this not working? Sorry, everyone, this is my fault. Okay.
There we go. All right, don't take this off my TimeGone person. Okay. So, the
introverts among us, no meetings or long-term commitments required. Instead,
it's just see something, code something. It's combining the fun of solving
coding challenges with the satisfaction of doing good. What's not to love? So,
you'll notice some common themes among my projects. These are what I like to do,
help people search and answer questions, and make the web a little easier to use.
Maybe you'd like to do something else, but let's get started. So, there was a
local community group that had a treasure trove of local history in
decades worth of PDF newsletters, but no way for people to really, like, access
that. So, they did finally post them online, but like this. PDF files in a
public Google Drive, not really the friendliest of user interfaces, but with
data skills, we can turn something like that into something like this. Shiny app
with full-text searching of the newsletter text. And since it's 2025, we
can even add a chatbot, where people can ask natural language questions of the
newsletters, and always I like to include links to the source documents that are
used to answer the questions, so people can check and make sure that the LLM
didn't just make something up. So, this is the text stack I used for this. For the
PDF to mark down text, I used LlamaParse. It's a commercial service, but they have
a generous free tier, and I like the results, but there are other open-source
options available. Lots of R packages, thanks to all the authors of these.
Ragnar and Elmer for the AI, and Shiny, and ShinyChat, and lots of others. And of
course, it's 2025, so I did use LLMs to help me write some of the code. I did
something similar with our city's meeting agendas and minutes. These
already are full-text searchable, but by individual group. So, if you want to ask a
question like, what's happening with rail trails around the city, you'd have to
like look in each individual thing. A little bit annoying. So, with data skills,
we can make something like this. Incredibly non-beautiful, but usable. And
in fact, one of our city councilors told me he actually uses this more than the
official city website, because it searches across. And of course, yes, it's
this year. I'm trying to add a chatbot also with the source documents. Another
interesting source of local data can be local election data. Now, if you live in a
large city, chances are there's a newspaper that already does a great job
with this data, but if you live in a small community, maybe not. This is how my
city posts its election results. Yes, this is the PDF, and this is the format they
use. And you'll see this in local media just basically turned into a regular
table, but with data skills, we could turn that into a map showing where
candidates were strongest and weakest. A searchable table, maybe with a few
dataviz elements, maybe even a heat map. So, the tech stack I used for this,
quarto for publishing, and again, lots of R packages, thanks to all the great
authors of those packages. Maybe your city has a lot of fun things to do,
but no one place where you can search and sort them. Can you web scrape?
You could make something like this. Again, not beautiful, but usable,
searchable. Tech stack for this, I'm using Rvest for the web scraping,
and since I'm reading an RSS feed, also tidy RSS, React table for the table
display, quarto for publishing, and I'm using a Linux cron job to keep it up to
date, but GitHub actions would use as well, which are free and you don't need
your own server. Especially in the US, recycling programs can be kind of
complicated. Can I recycle this? How do I recycle that? You can feed the whole
thing into a chatbot and let people ask natural language questions. This
actually can take questions in other languages, since I live in an immigrant
community. Again, always including the source documents, especially when we're
doing something, an unofficial app for official data, to make sure people can
check the data. Farmer's markets, who's going to be there? What can I buy there?
Maybe there's a list of vendors and what they sell. You can make a chatbot and
let people do that. So I hope this gave you some ideas about how your data
skills can help your community. Thanks a lot. Have a great conf.
you